Today's episode is sponsored by
Datadog a cloud scale monitoring
platform that unifies metrics, traces
logs, and more in a
single pane of glass automatically
alert on performance anomalies, easily
build custom dashboards and collaborate
to resolve issues in real
time. Try Datadog for yourself
with a free 14 day
trial Hansel minutes. Listeners will
also receive a free t-shirt
visit bitly.com/datadog shirt. That's BI
T L y.com/datadog shirt to
get started. This is Scott
Hanselman. This is another Hansel
minutes today. I'm talking with
Joseph White. He created the Pico
eight living in Japan and
working at Lexa lawful. Did
I pronounce that correctly? Yep.
That's right. So this started
out in your bed, in
your bedroom, in the mid,
in the early nineties, selling
shareware. And now it is
a wonderful thing online that
we'll talk about. Yeah, it's,
it's possible to trace the
path quite far back. This,
this was in New Zealand where
there was no, no internet.
Really? I was using BBSs
and distributing shareware on mail
order catalogs. That's how I
started out actually doing shareware.
I ran a bulletin board
on Wildcat PBS. Oh, that's
great. Yeah, my boss, in
fact, current, I didn't know
this cause I'm, you know,
I was a high school
student in the, in the
late eighties running on Wildcat.
And now in fact, my
boss@microsoftwhoowns.net was the guy that
wrote Wildcat BBS. So now
small world. Yeah, it is.
So you're in Japan. And
how did, how did Pico
age start Pico eight. If
I can understand the right
way to phrase it, you
call it a fantasy console.
Like I'm writing software and
games for a console, but
it doesn't exist. I can't
buy this console. Right. I
wanted to find a term,
which I didn't want to
call it a consult emulator
because you know, that has
a lot of baggage that
comes with it. First of
all, it implies that the
machine actually existed at one
point, which PicoWay didn't. But
I also wanted a way
to describe it. That was
a little bit self-explanatory. So,
you know, the fantasy part
of it sounds like it
doesn't really exist, but it
also sounds like it's something
that, you know, it's as
you want it to be,
where, how are you want
something to be? And if
you say, if it's an
emulator that implies that there
is a theoretical CPU and
memory spec out there that,
that a computer fits perfectly
and Pico weight runs everywhere.
Does it have a spec
though? Like, does it have
a fantasy CPU? So it
kind of does, but it
doesn't actually go very far
down. I, I was Tempted
to, you know, come up
with an instruction state and
a machine language and everything
like this and, and build
what I would call a
complete vertical console or a
vertical Confederacy console. But it
only goes down to the
level of feeling like there
might be underlying hardware. So
it goes down to it
to, to a Lu a
virtual machine. And, you know,
once I had that running
and I wrote some programs,
that's actually, when I realized,
Oh, I don't actually need
to really go further than
that. I can just say
that it runs on the,
a virtual machine and that's,
it that's enough. And it
has kind of a specification
in the sense of Lua,
assuming Paco eight games, and
the interface is limited to
128 by 128 pixels, 16
color display and four channel
audio. Right. That's the Right.
So those, yeah, those are
the important specifications. Those are
the ones that are immediately
obvious to the user and
what gives the machine, its
its character. So, so things
like the screen size and
the pellet, they have an
enormous impact on the way
the machine feels to users.
But in the past they
were just, you know, byproducts
of what hardware was available
and market forces and things
like this. But peak peak
rate is, is an attempt
to design those specifications from
scratch in a way that
has some sort of holistic
aesthetic value to it. Are
there are frames per second
specifications or like, does everything
run at 30 or 60
or something? And yet it
started out as, as dirty.
I felt 30 was, was
it a good sort of
starting point for new users
where if you see something
flashed by, in one frame
at 60 frames per second,
you can't really see what
happened at 30 frames per
second. You can make animations
that look good, you know,
running at 30 frames per
second. But later on, you
know, there were a lot
of 60 frames per second
fans that kind of pushed
me over the edge and
I was happy to oblige
and edit in 60 frames
mode. Okay. So there are
in, in their actual independent
mode. So it maintains compatibility
with anything that was made
before, right? Yeah. You need
to make that conscious decision
when you start a project
for it to be 60
frames. So it's, it's 2019
and I'm, you know, I
went back in time a
little bit and I looked
up the original game boy,
because I think that's where
it all started. Right. Everything
started at the game boy.
And I note that the
game boy had a screen
resolution even many, many years
ago of one 60 by
one 44. So here you
are in the 21st century
making something with an extraordinarily
limited screen display. Do you
think that's part of its
charm? Yeah. It's so there
are lots of sides to
that. I wanted to go
as low as I could
possibly go, because it was
sort of interesting, you know,
as, as a pixel artist,
when you're drawing something, it's,
it's interesting having an extremely
tight constraint and it adds
a lot more to the
character of the machine. If
it's low resolution, if I
picked something sort of halfway
between the GameBoy and the
feminine, the Nintendo entertainment system
or something like that, I
think it sort of would
have been more lost in,
you know, the sort of
perception of a mishmash of
ritual machines. It doesn't really
look like anything new, whereas
128 squared looks like quite
a different, shocking thing. Yeah,
it is, it is shocking.
And it's like, wow, how
could this be? How could
this be useful? It is
so constrained, but the brain
almost for lack of a
better word, almost fills in
the lack of detail, the,
the, the animations are very
evocative. There's clever use of
anti Elliot scene, but you've
only got 128 by 128
square to go with. So
your brain, at least when
I think of PicoWay games
after I played them fills
in the gaps and it
becomes as, as high resolution
as it needs to be.
Yeah. There's, it's surprising what
you can get away with
at that resolution. I think
there's sort of two ways
that the brain fills in
the gaps. One is, you
know, when everything's moving and
you have this extra temporal
information, it's, it's amazing how
good, you know, some three-dimensional
things, look, you don't really
feel that low resolution, but
if you show someone a
still frame of the three
D object, it just looks
like a big Pixley miss.
But, but the way that
I was originally planning or
hoping it would work out
is that the sort of
graphical styles that people would
go for would be more
symbolic and feel almost like
a text based game architect,
adventure, or, you know, like
a roguelike style where you're
not really worrying too much
about, you know, refining, visual
look, but you're, you're sort
of designing tokens that are
more, you know, it feels
more like board game tokens
on a board or something
like that. Yeah. Some of
the games and there's, I
mean, how many are there
now? Thousands. Yeah. There's, there's
five between five and 10,000.
I didn't get 5%. Wow.
So some of the games
do have that kind of
token style where it's a
side scroller or it's like,
like a Zelda kind of
a game. And then other
ones are pushing the limits.
They're both very, they're both
very, you know, eight bit
in their style, but they
have parallax scrolling and they
have implied depth that gives
you a sense of an
expansive world. So you're looking
at a view on something
that could be tens of
thousands of pixels wide or
more, Right? Yeah. There are,
there's a real range of
visual style and pick away
at games and very visually
beautiful games that I didn't
really expect. Has there been
a particular game or games
or style of game where
you really didn't expect it?
Like, you're just like, no,
that is not at all
what I thought you're gonna
be able to do. And
now I love that you
did it. So I, I
had hoped that the demo
scene would, would latch on
to pick away a little
bit. And so the demo
scene for, for those who
don't know is, is a,
it's a group of people
making programs that you sit
back and watch, and you
can kind of imagine them
like music videos, but everything
is generated in real time.
So you just create a
program that has, you know,
nice music and visuals, and
often the whole program fixed,
fits into a small site,
six 64 K or four
K. So Pico eight is
a good platform for that,
but I didn't expect the
number and quality of, of
demos coming up for peak
to be what it is.
They're really quite delightful and
phenomenal. I think that that
in, in a world where
computers are becoming infinitely powerful,
I mean, I'm even now
I'm, I'm on a, an
I nine with 20 odd
processors and an Nvidia 10
80 that I just bought.
And now apparently I need
Ray tracing. Cause my, my
10 80 is now my
$600 video card is now
really $300 on Craigslist. And
everyone says, I should buy
a fancy one. There seems
to be a Renaissance happening.
And it is a Renaissance
of constraints. As we get
infinite power, we want less
and we want to be
put in a box and
then we want to push
as far as we can
against the outside of that
box and see what we
can do in a few
K or a few pixels.
That's right. I think, yeah,
with, with modern hardware, you
can basically make anything you
want. And as a designer,
you get a little bit
lost in that. So it's
a, it's a nice feeling
to come back to a
constrained environment. Yeah. Constrained environments
were where I started out
in one of my first
big shareware games was LA
I should first word share
where apps or another, pardon
me was on a Palm
pilot. And I had, I
had four K of a,
of heap to work in
and that was it. And
there was no math library.
So you would find yourself
trying to do something and
saying, I don't have a
library to call on. I
can't just NPM install this.
I have to write it
from scratch. I'm seeing that
people are creating first person
shooters and you don't provide
any, any, you know, engine.
There's no unity for Pico
eight. Is there? No, it's,
it's really. So the most
you get is a Sprite
drawing function. That's the most
sort of advanced, you know,
you can, so you can
stretch one slice of a
Sprite, which is useful for
drawing things like Wolf 3d
walls. But yeah, apart from
that, you need to, I
mean, you don't even get
a sorting function. If you
need to sort things by,
by Zed, you have to
figure out how to sort
that, and you probably can't
use image sot every frame
or something like that. You,
you know, you need to
come up with tricks, like
doing incremental bubble sorts to,
you know, keep everything in
the right order. So that
something far away is not
physically in front of something
that's close. I thought about
giving them that and saying
that this is going to
become more of an engine.
Well, I think part of
the fun of Pico eight
is first of all, you
know, having an excuse to
revisit all of these classic
graphics algorithms and writing things
from scratch, but also for
newer program is to know
that there is no magic
and everything that you see
in your program is built,
you know, block by block,
right down to drawing a
pixel on the screen. So
they have, they understand the,
the metal like this is
the new metal. There's no,
I've obviously I've talked about
this because I used to
be a computer science professor,
is that when I learned
programming and presumably when you
did as well, I assume
we're somewhere around the similar
age we learned on the
metal, like here's a register
and here's assembly language. And
now for web developers, the
metal is F 12 tools
and the metal is a
JavaScript version machine. So why
not make new metal? Yeah.
And I mean, sort of
growing up in that era,
learning, sorry, I mean, I'm
still at C program and
I really love the language
being minimal. And you know,
you can poke insight in
either any library and there's
a kind of a vaguely
similar programming style that you
can get your head around
and things like this. So,
so when I'm doing things
like web development and suddenly
I have all these libraries
and all of this magic
going on, it's very disconcerting
and difficult to adjust. So
you're not comfortable with unlimited
power. Well, even, Yeah, even
if I'm using a system
that gives me something like,
you know, Sprite sorting, or
it has like an animation
system built in. The first
thing I do is just
instinctively throw it away and
figure out how I can
ignore it. And you just
either ignore it or do
it yourself from scratch again.
Yeah. I try to sort
of do things the proper
way and not reinvent the
wheel, but I think it
actually invariably blows up in
my face. And I, you
know, at some point I
need to, I need some
feature that doesn't exist or
it's slow for some reason
I don't understand or something
like this. So folks can
go to Lexa, lawful.com and
they can immediately just right
off the bat, hit the
play button and they're playing
a Pico eight game in
the browser. What is happening
here? Is this a JavaScript
implementation of the fantasy console?
Yeah. It's so it's actually
a compiled straight from my
C source base to, I
think the default one is
still JavaScript. ASM dot JS
is a subset of JavaScript
that can be compiled. It
can be, it can run
very fast. You can write
optimizes for it, knowing that
it's a subset and also
whip assembly. There's a WebAssembly
version. That's not actually live
yet. And then it also
people can go and get
it on windows, Mac, Linux,
raspberry pie. And because you're
writing it all in C
presumably you're writing it in
portable C and just cross
compiling it for basically anything.
So Pico eight has the
potentially the potentiality rather to
run anywhere. That's right. And
I think that's one of
the features of this of
system is that you can
just write it once in
one place and know that
it's going to run roughly
anywhere and look the same
for other users. And that's,
that's one reason that Pico
eight has a sort of
a virtual CPU speed. So
if you are in an
incredibly fast machine and you
write a program that is
very expensive, it will artificially
slow it down. So it
looks the same on a
raspy, probably one. I see.
So you could have, you
could throw unlimited power at
it and potentially do things
that you couldn't do on
a lower powered machine. But
for the most part, it
does have a preferred and
maximum speed so that all
the games will run as,
as they were expected. Right.
It's, it's actually, I mean,
in a way it's part
of the, the sort of
aesthetically driven specification, where I
attribute CPU costs to different
operations, like drawing sprites and
putting pixels. And so when
you designing your game and
your algorithm, you have to
sort of work around these,
these limits. And I think
it helps designers, you know,
leads designers down a path.
They wouldn't necessarily take Hi
friends as a programmer. You
think in objects with Mongo
DB. So does your database,
Mongo DB is the most
popular document based database built
for modern application developers on
the cloud era, millions of
developers use Mongo DB to
power. The world's most innovative
products and services from cryptocurrency
to online gaming IOT and
more, you can try Mongo
DB today with Atlas, the
global cloud database service that
runs on AWS Azure and
Google cloud configure, deploy and
connect to your database in
just a few minutes, check
it out at Mongo db.com/atlas.
That's M O N G
O D b.com/atlas. Now I
went up there and started
playing and got entranced. And
I went and I purchased
it and I was, it
was $15 U S and
I was now, I'm now
able to run it anywhere.
And when I downloaded Pico
eight and installed it in
case my case on windows,
I noted that it isn't
just a runner. It is
its own, you know, IDE
for lack of a better
word. You can you write
Pico eight apps with the
PicoWay tools, Right? And in
fact, that's, that's where it
really started was not as
a virtual or authentically console,
but as a home computer
called licks 500 was the
original title. And the idea
was that it would feel
like a BBC micro, which
was one of the first
machines I, I used, but
it would make it easy
to, to author content directly
in the machine. So it's,
it's what I wish a
BBC micro was like, you
know, you can write programs,
but you can also just
flip into a different screen
and draw the sprites that
you want to use in
your program. Yeah. You, you
just flipped kind of naturally
back and forth between them.
It feels though a little
bit constrained. One of the
things that my son, my
11 year old who's working
on a Pico eight game
right now has found is
that he finally feels that
the font is so constrained
that he's, his eyes are
blurring a little bit. Cause
it's all caps, it's a
pixel based font. Do you
find, as you talk to
your authors, do most people
write their Pico eight games
entirely in the Pico eight
environment? So it it's around,
I did a very informal,
you know, poll on Twitter,
which is very biased, but
it was around 50 54
people using the editor and
using external tools for yeah.
The font is terrible. It's,
it's sort of, I'm glad
that you said that, you
know, I'm like, you know,
I'm not, I have no
illusions about that. In fact,
in the original design, I
was really imagined like, assuming
that I would need to
have a text mode or
at least a sort of
text overlay, plain, that you
would write text to separately
so that, you know, specifically
so that I could use
it in the code editor.
But then I started fooling
around with, with fonts and
it started looking possible at
the whole thing and 128
squared, which I never imagined
was possible and like that.
So that idea was so
pure. And so, you know,
so exciting to me at
the time that there was
no way that I could
go back to something more
practical. And that's, that's, I
mean, that's kind of a
common pattern in all of
the areas of big waste
design. Like, Hey, I sort
of found something that was
too sort of entertaining to
me as a designer and
program that I couldn't let
it go. And I know
that it's gonna cause people
trouble, but I, you know,
I'm trying to cause people
interesting and sort of funny
trouble, not bad trouble. If
I can make that distinction,
That is a fixed really
well said. And that has
a really good way to
put it because that's exactly
what I felt. I was
like, okay, this is, this
is cute. This is interesting,
but I'm old and my
eyes hurt. So I want
to figure out a way
to do this. So I
start poking around and I
learned about the cartridges and
the, the, the, the, how
they're stored, how the text
is stored. And then I
found a visual studio code
plugin that would allow me
to write these things in
a different editor and move
seamlessly back and forth, taking
the.pa file and the source
code between the two. And
then now I can just
write it in visual studio
code and hit F five
and it runs Pico eight.
So it was a charming
problem to have, it was
not annoying in it by
any means. Yeah. I, I
tried to make the, so
there are two versions of
the cartridge format. There is
a sort of distributable image
format, but there's also a
default text format, which is
yeah. It's designed to be
directly editable by a text
editor so that you can
sort of escape the, the
font, The idea that everything
be self contained. I think
there was also part of
its charm. Even the text
based format is effectively just
one file. You don't have
15 different files that they
all work together on. It's
just one thing, Right. I
think having, I mean, one
file is kind of convenient,
but I, I suppose that's
more of an implementation detail.
Like, you know, if you'd
never used an external editor
peak rate could completely hide
that fact. And it would
just look the same. And
then, you know, when you're
sharing cartridges, you don't usually
share the text file that
you normally use. Right. You
can only save to clipboard
and then paste it into
an email or, you know,
upload it to the server
and send someone the ID
to download it or something
like that. Yeah. Certainly you
could make this a virtual
internal file system and hide
all those details. Right. But
then again, it wouldn't be
quite so charming. Yeah. I,
I, I think dot paid
files, so kind of cute
somehow, and it's nice to
see the, the Sprite started
kicking around. So the dot
P eight files are cute,
but the part that took
me a while, cause I,
cause you, you kind of
casually mentioned it on the
website, but it isn't, but,
and forgive me, it just
isn't immediately obvious what's going
on. I was trying to
figure out how I could
download a cartridge and have
it and possess it and
email it to a friend.
And I was looking for
a download link and I
was trying to figure out
what am I supposed to
right. Click on. And then
it clicked that the PNG
that looks like a little
cartridge, it looks like a
Nintendo switch cartridge. Almost. It
has a little notch on
the side to indicate as
if it's supposed to come
in a certain way. Is
the game itself? The picture
is the game. Yeah. It's
actually, I didn't really think
much of it when I,
when I decided to use
that system. But, but late
later on, it became clear,
you know, how much that
really adds to the feeling
of using a virtual console
thing, because you have these
like, just knowing that they're
there on your desk and
that they look like cartridges
sort of completes the illusion
to some degree. Is it?
So the PNG is a
picture of a cartridge. It
says, PicoWay, it has the
website, it's got the name
of the game. And then
a screenshot of a moment
in time in that particular
game, where is the instruction
set? Where's the, where's the
code? So that the code
is wound into the low
bits of the red, green,
blue, alpha data. And so
one would be great cartridges,
a 32 K block of
just eight bit data. And
so when it writes to
a P eight file, it's
just, you know, writing in
a sort of human readable
text format. But when it's
writing to a PNG file,
it's generating first, it's generating
the theater's. Okay. And then
it's waning that information into
the low bits of the
color data. You just have
enough Slack room. That's not
visibly seen by us because
the PNG isn't filled with
visible into the colors that
you're using or not complex
enough that you needed that
space. So you just squirrel
away the things in that
space. Yep. That's that's right.
So there's in a regular
RGBA image. There are 32
bits available in one pixel.
And so I use eight
of them and you, yeah,
you can't see it Now,
does that w I worried,
and maybe this is where
I know just enough to
be dangerous as my dad
says, I was worried that
in the saving or in
the transmitting or in the
moving I'm, it might be
lost. Could I, might I
open it into a paintbrush
program and to save it
and ruin it and ruin
the data. So you can,
unfortunately, there are some programs
that, you know, we'll take
the Liberty of missing with
those bits because, you know,
to save space or whatever,
and also especially uploading to
services like Twitter or Facebook,
they're likely to do something
to interest, to the image,
to crunch it smaller. I
see. So then do we
know if tweeting a cartridge
picture destroys its internal data?
It worked at one point
I haven't tried recently. I
think Twitter has, has gradually
been, you know, more aggressive
in reducing image sizes. So
understandably so, you know, PicoWay
cartridges might have been some
collateral damage. Okay. But certainly
emailing them, put driving them,
you know, dragging them out
of a, a browser or
saving them that if, as
long as you don't open
it, mess with it and
save it again in an
optimizing PNG editor. You're probably
okay. Yeah. I haven't heard
of that breaking down yet.
so in the, in
the days and weeks that
I spent messing around with
Pico eight, I, I assume
I went through all of
the stages. I mean, they're
not stages of grief, they're
stages of, of charm. Then
you should probably document these
stages at some point, right.
There's that initial? Like, what
is this thing that I've
discovered? I feel like I've
found a corner of the
internet and I told my
friends about it and there
was a pretty clear 50,
50 split between people who
knew what PicoWay was and
thought that it was amazing.
And where have you been
Scott? You could have, you
could have been with us
all these years playing Pico
eight games. And then the
other half was like, Oh,
that's amazing too. I want
to, I want to do
this as well. And then
the next stage, and we're
in stage three or four
was, I want to physically
take it with me. So
I went and spent days
trying to find the perfect
physical hardware to run this
console on. I don't think
it exists today. Does it?
Yeah. I haven't found a
handheld that I would recommend
as you know, the ideal
machine for Pico eight. And
it depends what people are
using it for as well.
If it's just for, for
playing games, you know, there
are a bunch of reasonable
solutions like the, the what's
it called the clockwork clockwork
play. And It was bundled
with the pocket chip for
awhile there. But the pocket
chip has a beautiful screen.
And with all the respect
to our friends, with the
pocket chip, a lousy keyboard,
yes, I really loved the
pocket chip vision apart from
the keyboard and the screen
was miraculously suitable for ,
it was 270 pixels high
against Pico weights, 256. If
you, if you show each
pixel doubled, so you get
some black strips down the
side, but it was actually
pretty good. And you know,
it came with wifi. So
you could interact with the
BBS and things like that.
And the clockwork PI, and
I'm going to have links
to all of this in
the show notes. It's an
interesting open source kind of
portable kit that looks effectively
like a, an idealized game
boy modularized, and it's it's
close, but unfortunately it's pixels
are not square. Those aren't
square and the resolution is
a little bit awkward. Yeah.
So there's, there's always something
just a little bit off.
I think the, the, the
closest that's currently available is
not a handheld it's arcade
cabinet. The pike aid by
pine Moroni is sipping at
768. So you get perfect
scaling, but the high resolution
models are high enough resolution
that, you know, you can
scale it and not see
the difference. It's, it's, it's
interesting. It's almost part of
its charm that it's not
easily to do to this.
You know, I, I still
feel like I can make
it happen if I look
enough or I find the
right part, or maybe if
we publicly and gently shamed
the clockwork hi people, because
you know, it is a,
it is a console that
is modular. There's only simply
one module per module in,
you know, module type. Maybe
they just need to get
their screen situation under control.
So I don't have serious
ambitions into creating this thing
myself, but I know I,
you know, of course looked
around at hardware suppliers, you
know, just in case to
see what, see whether it
was available. And it is
a very, very awkward resolution.
The first time I looked,
I found the, sorry, I
mean, the very smallest possible
resolution, 128 squared that fits
perfectly one-to-one, there are millions
and millions of surplus screens
that size it's really, you
know, a good deal, a
good choice because they they're
the same as Nakia 4,000
series phones and, you know,
a bunch of other devices
use them. So there are
some projects like tiny pie
and yeah, I can't remember
off hand what it was
called, but that build little
shells that, you know, just
put some buttons in a
screen and a battery around
the raspberry PI. But the
next biggest screen that I
could find at that time
was the eight K by
eight K like observatory dome
screen that is 40 meters
across. So I really, you
know, that also fits pick
away perfectly, but it's not
very practical and a little
bit too large. So it,
you know, it's pretty hard
to find something square that
that is a power of
two size in the middle.
The tiny pie is very,
very close. It's got the
one 28 by one 28
TFT, but, but then you,
what you, what you get
in screen, you lose in
buttons or mediocre, you know,
it's three D printed case.
I mean, I think that's
the, I think that's the
most sort of viable possibility.
And I, I did walk
around for a number of
months with a mocked up
cardboard Pico out in my
pocket with that screen size,
just so I could pull
it out at random times
and sort of see how
it felt. You know, it's
just do small, if you're
focusing on it, it doesn't
seem that bad, but it's
definitely out for things like
plugging a keyboard in programming
on it, which I think
is a kind of an
important aspect of the machine,
even if it's portable. Well,
it's nice that you're leaving
it to us to figure
out, like you said, this
is a fantasy console and
that's part of the fantasy
is to try to figure
out the perfect way to
carry this around and, and,
and do whatever you want.
And I've got PI, I
have a three D printed
game boy here that I've
got, which is a pie
with a nice screen. I
could probably put Biko eight
on that. I've got a
little one that is a,
a pie girl, which is
the PI GameBoy clone from
ADA fruit. I could potentially
do something with that, but
it does need a machine
with a little bit of
heft because we're, again, we're
not trying to be a
low powered machine, right. This
is not a real, Yeah.
It's, I'm sorry. When I
hit the choice to make
it efficient, you know, when
I was choosing between efficiency
and, you know, design freedom,
it's called, I always chose
design freedom. So, so for
example, I could have sort
of limited the number, the,
the range of features of
Lewer that you could use.
And if I had cut
things like coroutines, and, and
also things like allowing infinite
loops is a subtle one
that I won't go into.
It's quite hard to, if
infinite loops, you know, you
need to be running on
an interpreter rather than compiling
using Git or something like
that. So if I, if
I had chosen those thin,
maybe it could run on
something much lower powered, but
at the moment it needs
around 700 megahertz or something
like that. Oh, wow. So
what, what websites have bounded
Coke have come up around
this? I've seen this thing
called itch.io. These are the,
these different indie game browsing
places. People can get Pico
eight games in other places.
Is that true? Other than
just at your website? Yeah,
I didn't. I wanted to
be sort of an unworldly
garden. So it's, it's very
easy to export to binary,
sand HTML, and so many,
many pig raid games I
released on itch.io. There's more
than a thousand or one
and a half thousand B
great games there. So that
means that I could, as
a, as a consumer download
a great a game that
looks amazing and never really
know at the engine and
the community behind it. So
when you, when you run
a PicoWay game, it still
comes up with the peak
rate food screen. So, you
know, that it's the peak
of that game and it
sort of frames what you're
about to look at. I
think it allows people to
not worry too much about
making super low resolution things,
because, you know, when you
run a pick away game,
you sort of know what
the deal is and it
has this, you know, there's
a reason for it. And
there are a lot of
great zenes and educational tool
sets that are out there.
In fact, I'm going to
have Dylan Bennett who is creating
educational content and game dev
things and doing a lot
of work on Pico eight.
And he's created a really
great PicoWay tool kit and
a, basically a 72 page
Xen on how to do
game development. So you've got
people making amazing tutorials and
algorithm. Step-by-steps doing your, doing
your documentation for you, making
it even easier to learn.
Yeah. He calls it. ,
it's really a book. It's
really a nice book, which,
you know, you can, you
can just read it from,
start to finish. And afterwards,
after that, you basically have
all the tools you need
to make it really any,
any game. But I, I
view the, the manual and
the, the user guide, which
aren't finished yet as sort
of part of the, the
whole big rate experience. So
even though there's a great
community of people making documentation
and tutorials. Yeah. I'm, I'm
also, it's a sort of
a nice nostalgic trip for
me trying to do things
like explain variables to somebody
for the first time. And
so it's something I'm enjoying
doing as well as, as
writing, you know, from scratch
tutorials and kind of building
the manual into something that
looks like it could have
been released in the 1980s.
And do you think that
this is something that I
should take to, for example,
to my son's charter school
and teach folks like this
is a great first environment,
it's the new scratch? Why
not, why not teach Pico
eight rather than something else
as a first language for
kids? I think it is
a good fist environment, but
it, you know, scratch does
it a different, a different
job. They have different roles.
And I think  role
is kind of, like I
mentioned before is to remove
magic and give, give new
program is the feeling that
they really can just make
anything, you know, to really
so shorter than what it's
like to build a simple
thing from, from nothing. And,
you know, it only takes
five or 10 lanes to
make quite a beautiful, interesting
thing. Yeah. I've even discovered
a community on Twitter, which
are putting Pico eight games
in a tweet and seeing
how fancy and how complicated
it can get and fit
in entirely in one tweet.
Yeah. So Twitter sort of
created a sub sub constraints
genre for be great. And
most of the peak rate
things that I released recently
are also tweet cards. It's
really fun trying to fit
something in 280 characters. Fantastic.
Well, I'm going to include
links to all of this
stuff, to the PicoWay user
manual. The zenes like game
development books from great cheat
sheets, the huge community Wiki.
And I would really encourage
folks that are listening to
go and check this out,
play your Pico eight games,
maybe share them with yourself,
with your friends, with your
family. If you're doing web
development like me and you
spend all day doing text
boxes over data, it can
really be a nice way
to unwind and make a
game in an environment like
Pico eight. I really appreciate
chatting with me today, Joseph.
Oh, thank you very much.
I've been talking with Joseph White,
the creator of Pico eight.
This has been another episode
of Hanselman. We'll see you
again next week. .